[THEME MUSIC]
>>GEORGE NOORY: Welcome
to "Beyond Belief."
I'm George Noory.
And for years I've interviewed
the man you're about to meet,
Robert Zubrin, who is the
president of the Mars Society
and Pioneer Astronautics,
an organization devoted
to getting us into space.
Robert, always a
pleasure seeing you.
>>ROBERT ZUBRIN: Thanks for
inviting me to come and talk
to you again.
>>NOORY: You have been
fascinated with space
since you were a little kid.
What was that one catalyst
that got you really into it?
>>ZUBRIN: It was Sputnik.
I was five when Sputnik flew.
>>NOORY: Ah.
>>ZUBRIN: And I was
an early reader.
I was already reading
science fiction.
And while the adults may have
been terrified by Sputnik,
I was over the top
excited about it.
Because what it meant
was all these stories
I was reading about
the spacefaring future
were going to be real.
And I just got totally into
it and building rockets.
My dad got me a telescope.
I did drawings of the Moon
through the telescope.
And I learned all
the science I could.
And I was on board.
And you know, we were
going to the Moon by 1970,
Mars by 1980, Alpha
Centuri by the year 2000.
I wanted to be part of it.
Now of course, we did
realize only the first part
of that program.
We got to the Moon by 1970.
But at exactly that time, and
I was entering college by then,
the Nixon administration
slammed on the brakes
and the Mars
program was aborted.
And all the rest--
>>NOORY: Came a halt.
>>ZUBRIN: Came to
a halt. And it was
one of the great
disappointments in my life.
And for a while I accepted it
and went and did other stuff.
But at a certain
point I said nah,
I'm not going to let this ride.
>>NOORY: Had we
kept the pace going
after we stopped going to the
Moon, but had we kept it up,
could we have been
to Mars by now?
>>ZUBRIN: Oh, Yes.
NASA had plans for the first
human landing on Mars for 1981.
If we had kept
going, we would have
had a permanent human
settlement on Mars by 1988.
>>NOORY: Wow.
>>ZUBRIN: And probably the
first children born on Mars
would be graduating high
school on Mars right about now.
>>NOORY: Do we even have a
space program today, Robert?
>>ZUBRIN: Oh yeah, we
have a space program.
But only parts of
it are functional.
The robotic planetary
exploration program
is quite functional and is
returning exciting results
from their various probes
to Mars and Jupiter.
The space astronomy program is
very functional with the Hubble
Space Telescope, with the
Kepler Space Telescope.
And this year we may launch
TESS, a new space telescope.
And then the WEBB
Space Telescope.
They've got great stuff.
But the human space flight
program is completely adrift.
It's been operating
without meaningful goals
basically since
the end of Apollo.
We have enough
money we're putting
into the human
spaceflight program
to be sending people
to the Moon and Mars.
But instead, they're just going
up and down to Earth orbit
and being used as test subjects
by guinea pig scientists
to measure the effects of zero
gravity on human physiology.
This is just crazy.
Astronauts should not be guinea
pigs, they should be explorers.
>>NOORY: Right, right.
It's got to be frustrating
for somebody like you.
>>ZUBRIN: Yeah, certainly.
>>NOORY: Because I mean, you
have developed your career
to try to get us to explore and
we're not doing that anymore.
>>ZUBRIN: Right.
We need a goal-driven
human spaceflight program.
And the primary goal at this
point should be humans to Mars.
Mars is where the science is.
It's where the challenge is.
It's where the future is.
And, I must say, that if we
build a hardware set that
can take us to
Mars, we'll also be
able to do the Moon and the
near-Earth asteroids as well.
>>NOORY: Robert, I
am enthralled though
at the privatization
of space right now.
It seems that these private
companies are coming along
like gangbusters.
>>ZUBRIN: Well, yes.
They finally are.
For a while, you
know, in the '80s
and the '90s it was just talk.
And to some extent a cop
out for people saying oh,
we don't need NASA.
Private people will do it.
But starting with Elon Musk
and now with Jeff Bezos,
this stuff is now real.
And Musk, in particular, has
shown that not only can he
develop space flight hardware
at one third the cost
or 1/10 the cost,
one third the time,
as has become accepted in
the major aerospace industry.
He's even developed
stuff that they've
refused to develop ever, such as
reusable spaceflight boosters.
>>NOORY: Which is amazing.
>>ZUBRIN: Yes, it's amazing.
But you know, here's the thing.
The problem wasn't that
they couldn't do it,
not that they couldn't do it.
The problem was there was no
incentive for them to do it.
Because the contract
model that NASA
had put in place with
the major spaceflight
contractors was cost plus.
Whatever they did, NASA
would pay them plus 10%.
So, they were encouraged
to maintain high costs.
They were encouraged
to increase overheads.
There was nothing to be
gained by not doing so.
Whereas Musk spends
his money like it's
his own, because a
significant fraction of it is.
>>NOORY: It is.
>>ZUBRIN: OK.
And so, his goal is to produce
things as cheaply as possible,
both the rockets themselves
and now making them reusable.
>>NOORY: Does it make sense
to have a reusable rocket?
>>ZUBRIN: Oh yes, it does.
And he's only reusing
the first stage,
so it's basically going to cut
the cost of launch in half.
If he can reuse
the second stage,
then we can talk about
cutting the price of launch
by a factor of 10,
and even ultimately
by much more than that, by 100.
>>NOORY: Wow.
>>ZUBRIN: I mean--
>>NOORY: Big difference.
>>ZUBRIN: And also, and once
you get costs down that low,
if you have a rocket like
what he has built, OK,
where the first stage
flies into space
but then comes back
to the landing site
and then the second
stage goes to orbit,
if you can go to orbit you can
go halfway around the world
just as easily.
So, you're talking about New
York to Sydney in 40 minutes.
And this is--
>>NOORY: Wow.
>>ZUBRIN: Yes.
So, this is the market
that will ultimately
lead to cheap spaceflight.
Because you know,
we only you launch
about 80 or 90 satellites
a year, worldwide,
the whole world.
>>NOORY: Right.
>>ZUBRIN: OK.
Now if it was cheaper,
maybe we'd launch 200.
But in contrast,
we fly thousands
of airliners every
day, tens of thousands.
And that's the kind
of frequency you
have to have if
we're going to make
spaceflight as cheap as air
flight and as safe as air
flight.
But long-distance surface
to surface is that market.
And that's what
these reusable launch
vehicles will make possible.
It's obviously impossible with
expendable launch vehicles.
I mean, air travel would
be ridiculously expensive
if they threw away the
airliner after each flight.
>>NOORY: Yeah, after
each flight, sure.
>>ZUBRIN: So, it's got to
be reusable to open that.
But once you do open
that, then you've
got a market thousands of
times bigger than the satellite
market.
>>NOORY: Of the private
guys, Bezos and Musk--
>>ZUBRIN: Yes.
>>NOORY: Which one is
doing the better job?
>>ZUBRIN: Well, at the
moment, Musk is ahead, OK.
There's no doubt.
Musk has actually achieved a
flight to orbit numerous times.
He's also developed a capsule.
Bezos has also
developed a capsule.
But Bezos has not
flown to orbit yet.
The thing is, Bezos is
much richer than Musk.
So, if Musk should falter,
Bezos can keep going.
>>NOORY: But they're obviously
doing this, Robert, for money,
right?
Eventually they want to
make money doing this.
It's not just for
the love of space.
>>ZUBRIN: Well, I actually
disagree with that assessment.
>>NOORY: How come?
>>ZUBRIN: Well, because, I
mean Musk will make money
with SpaceX, OK.
But this guy could make money
with a chain of candy stores.
He could make money
doing anything, OK.
>>NOORY: He's got
the Midas touch.
>>ZUBRIN: Yes, certainly.
And so, the question is,
why is he doing SpaceX?
It would be much easier,
I mean, you know,
he could be like Donald Trump
and set up casino hotels, OK.
There's a lot more money with
that and it's a lot lower risk
than trying to build rockets.
>>NOORY: And you've got
hard real estate there.
>>ZUBRIN: And so forth.
Musk wants to change the world.
Musk-- he's not Mother Theresa.
He's not a generous
person in a saintly sense.
But what he is interested
in is his self-interest
is he seeking eternal glory
for doing great deeds.
It's what the ancient
Greeks called kleos.
>>NOORY: Yeah.
>>ZUBRIN: It's why
Achilles killed Hector.
It's you know, that
is what Musk is about.
He doesn't just want
to do great deeds.
He wants eternal glory
for doing great deeds.
But that's basically
the character trait
of a person who
wants to be a hero.
>>NOORY: Isn't that
like Jeff Bezos too?
>>ZUBRIN: Yes, as well.
>>NOORY: They're very similar.
>>ZUBRIN: That's right.
And so that's why
they're doing it.
I mean, Bezos is going to make
much more money with Amazon
than he is with Blue Origin.
So, he's doing this in order
to do something really great.
He's doing this in
order to do-- you know,
100 years from now nobody
is going to remember Amazon.
Just like nobody
today remembers what
were the big companies in 1880.
>>NOORY: Right.
>>ZUBRIN: OK.
But we remember Thomas Edison.
OK.
>>NOORY: And Henry Ford.
>>ZUBRIN: And Henry Ford.
But OK, so there is still a
Motor Company named after Ford.
But you know, people will
remember Thomas Edison
a thousand years from
now, whereas who's
going to remember you know,
the Union Pacific Railroad
or whatever the biggest
railroad was at the time?
>>NOORY: How would you grade
our current administration
for the possibility of
more space exploration?
>>ZUBRIN: At this point,
there's no action.
I mean, NASA's on autopilot.
So, the parts of NASA that
were being competently run,
which I mentioned
the space astronomy
program and the robotic
exploration programs,
they're just kind
of going along doing
what they were doing before.
So, that's OK.
The problem is, is that
the human spaceflight
program is aimless.
So, we're spending,
you know, whatever,
$10 billion dollars a year,
about half of NASA's budget,
on the human spaceflight
program and it's not
accomplishing anything.
OK.
If you want to
accomplish something,
you have to have a goal, OK.
They just did this thing
where they issued a statement
from the White House
saying it's the goal
of the American human
spaceflight program
to establish people on the Moon.
But they haven't even
appointed a NASA administrator.
>>NOORY: Right.
>>ZUBRIN: They haven't asked for
any appropriations for a Moon
base program.
>>NOORY: There's no plan.
>>ZUBRIN: There's no plan.
There's no program.
And so, you know,
if this goes on
as it's going on, then four
years from now or whenever,
what we'll do if
we're sitting here,
we'll be talking about
the great accomplishments
of the Webb Space Telescope
and the TESS Space Telescope.
And we'll be talking about
the great accomplishments
of the next Mars Rover.
But the human
spaceflight program
will not have accomplished
anything in the meantime.
>>NOORY: Robert, the
PBS program "Space Time"
talks about a new technology
called him EM Drive.
>>MATTHEW O'DOWD: The
structure of the EM Drive
is a tapered copper
cylinder with two flat ends.
A resonant radiation
field is induced
inside so microwave
standing waves reflecting
between the ends.
The device was invented
by Roger Shawyer in 1999.
And a couple of similar
proposals followed,
most notably Guido
Fetta's Cannae Drive.
These fall under the family
of microwave resonant cavity
thrusters.
They propose that thrust and
net force in one direction,
the fat end for
the EM Drive, can
be achieved by
extracting momentum
from the internal radiation
field but with no propellants.
This would be pretty
revolutionary,
because conventional rocket
engines are fundamentally
limited by the
fact that they have
to carry not just an energy
source, but propellant,
a bunch of mass to shoot out the
back end to push them forward.
The law of conservation
of momentum demands this.
Roger Shawyer explains the
EM Drive's alleged thrust
as resulting from
differential radiation
pressure between the two ends.
>>NOORY: You've heard
of this kind of drive?
>>ZUBRIN: Uh, yes.
Now OK, there's two
separate issues here.
If you're just talking
about a radiation drive,
then there's nothing new, OK.
That is, it's always been known
that electromagnetic radiation
has momentum.
It's why solar sails
can get momentum
by reflecting sunlight.
And if you have a radio
transmitter and you have a dish
and you're shooting
it in one direction,
it will exert some force
in the other direction.
That is well understood physics.
The issue is that they're
claiming anomalous thrust that
is greater than that
amount of thrust, which
is outside of known physics.
And the problem that I have
is that the experiments that
have been done have been
done at such low thrust
that the measurement trying to
distinguish between what they
claim and what we do
expect to be there
is so small that it could be
ascribed to experimental error.
And since there is no
theory that supports
the reality of their claims--
or no accepted theory,
let me put it that way--
at this point, I'm in
a wait and see mode.
I'm not out there
throwing my hat
in the air for the EM
Drive, other than what
was known always, which was
using electromagnetic radiation
to create photon pressure.
>>NOORY: Robert, do you think
we should go back to the Moon
or move on to Mars?
>>ZUBRIN: Well, I think we
have to set our sights on Mars.
But we don't need to design
gigantic science fiction
spaceships to go to Mars.
We can go to Mars with
essentially the same kind
of transportation
system that you
could use to go to the Moon.
Which means a
heavy lift booster,
something that could throw
perhaps 50 tons on Trans-Mars
or trans-lunar injection.
>>NOORY: How long is the trip?
>>ZUBRIN: Well, to the
Moon is three days,
to Mars is six months.
>>NOORY: Six months.
>>ZUBRIN: OK.
And either way is doable.
But the thing is this.
In other words, you design a
coherent Moon-Mars program.
You design a Moon
mission, not with
the absolute minimum capability
for getting to the Moon,
but with a healthy capability
of getting to the Moon
like we had with Apollo.
And then you constrain
the Mars mission
to operate within
the performance
envelope of that capability.
>>NOORY: If we go to Mars
and it takes six months
to go, how long would we
stay before we'd come back?
>>ZUBRIN: Well, the
flight plan that I
prefer is six months out, six
months back, a year and a half
on the surface in between.
>>NOORY: A year and a half?
>>ZUBRIN: Yes.
>>NOORY: Wow.
>>ZUBRIN: OK, in other words,
the cycle is two and 1/2 years.
And I would prefer to
spend the majority of it
on the surface of Mars, because
that is where the science is.
That's what the
mission is about.
The mission is, you know,
not about spending time
flying through space.
It's about doing
exploration on Mars.
So, you could spend nine months
going and nine months coming
back, and then you'd be
a year on the surface.
But I'd rather spend
60% of the mission time
on the surface than 40%.
>>NOORY: Let's see how
NASA's plan for going to Mars
could evolve.
>>NARRATOR: NASA's path for
human exploration of Mars
begins in low earth orbit
aboard the International Space
Station.
On board the
orbiting laboratory,
astronauts are helping us
prove many of the technologies
and communications systems
needed for human missions
into deep space.
>>CHARLES BOLDEN:
Well, the crews
right now on the
International Space Station
are using this wonderful
outpost to help
us get farther and farther into
space, to asteroids, to Mars
eventually.
I think the science
on Station is
making incredible
breakthroughs that
are going to help us make life
better for people right here
on Earth.
>>RICK MASTACCHIO: We and our
other international partner
crewmates are working off
the planet for the planet.
>>MIKE HOPKINS: NASA, along
with our international partners,
conduct scientific research
every day here on the Station
as we use this
orbiting laboratory
as a stepping stone for
future deep space exploration.
>>NARRATOR: In tandem with
Space Station research,
NASA will send a robotic
mission to capture and redirect
an asteroid to orbit the Moon.
Astronauts aboard
NASA's Orion spacecraft
will explore the asteroid and
return to earth with samples.
This experience will help
NASA test new systems
and capabilities such as solar
electric propulsion, which
will send cargo as part
of human missions to Mars.
NASA's new space
launch system will
enable these proving
ground missions
to test new capabilities.
Human missions to Mars will rely
on Orion and an evolved version
of SLS, which will be the most
powerful rocket ever flown.
>>NOORY: Robert, how close are
we to doing things like that?
>>ZUBRIN: Well, that's
actually a pretty funny movie.
>>NOORY: I noticed
a little chuckle.
>>ZUBRIN: OK, yeah, no.
Because all right,
the first part of it
had some truth in it.
We certainly have learned stuff
on the Space Station that will
be useful in going to Mars.
But you know, if you are going
to have a nautical program
of sea exploration, you might
very well have a training ship
that you moor out in
the harbor or in the bay
that you send the cadets on.
>>NOORY: You should.
>>ZUBRIN: OK, you should.
But that would not be the
sum total or centerpiece
of your program.
That would be just sort
of one facility that
helps support the program.
The rest of the show
was nonsensical.
For instance, this
thing about capturing
a chunk of an asteroid and
putting it in lunar orbit.
That has nothing to do with
sending people to Mars.
And in fact, that
idea, which was popular
when this film was
made about a year ago,
has already been dropped, OK.
This idea of capturing a boulder
and putting a lunar orbit
is completely irrelevant
to humans to Mars.
No one interested in
sending humans to Mars
would ever have come
up with such an idea.
>>NOORY: Why?
>>ZUBRIN: It was an idea that
they came up with for something
to do.
And then they
attempted to justify it
by saying it's part of the
human Mars mission program.
It's similarly the solar
electric propulsion,
which is something that
there's a faction in NASA that
wants to do it.
We don't need it to
send humans to Mars.
I wouldn't use it to send
humans to Mars if I had it.
And once again, it's just that
all these separate programs are
being justified
or rather they are
being supported by
different constituencies out
of their self-interest.
And then they justify
them by saying oh, this
is needed if you go to Mars.
But this is the
problem with NASA
right now, in particular the
human space flight program.
They are not spending
money to do things.
They are doing things
in order to spend money.
>>NOORY: That's not smart.
>>ZUBRIN: No, it's like
running your business
to make your vendors happy.
And you know, if you're
running a business,
you do buy things from vendors.
But you do that
for your purposes.
You don't do things
in order to say
hi vendors, Merry Christmas.
We've decided to do
something to make you happy.
So, what's needed is for NASA
to say OK, here's the mission.
It's humans to Mars.
What do we need to do that?
And then you do those things.
Since this movie was
composed, they've
come up with a new
hobby horse, which
is to put a space
station in lunar orbit,
supposedly because we need
in order to go to Mars.
We do not need a space station
in lunar orbit to go to Mars.
>>NOORY: Is that the Trump
administration's plan?
>>ZUBRIN: Well, actually, it
was the last gasp of the Obama
administration, but it
hasn't been abandoned yet.
And so, at this point
that's still the program
that they're claiming
is necessary, probably
because there is not yet a NASA
administrator to throw it out.
>>NOORY: Sounds like
a waste of money.
>>ZUBRIN: Yes.
It's literally a waste of money.
That is its purpose.
And you know, you don't need
a space station in lunar orbit
to go to Mars.
You don't even need a space
station in lunar orbit
to go to the Moon.
If you want to go to the
Moon, you go to the Moon.
>>NOORY: From here.
>>ZUBRIN: Yes.
>>NOORY: Bang.
>>ZUBRIN: OK.
If you want to go to
Mars, you go to Mars.
So, basically, what we need
is a mission driven program.
I mean, the way to
think about it is--
>>NOORY: And what
do you mean by that?
>>ZUBRIN: Well OK, let's
think of two couples.
And they each want
a dream house, OK.
Now couple number one, they
sit down, they talk it over,
they get a general idea what
the dream house should be.
They bring an architect over.
And over the kitchen
table he sketches it out.
And they say ah,
that's the house.
And then they bring
in an engineer
and he actually designs it.
And then they build
that house, OK.
That's a mission driven program.
That's Apollo.
OK, couple number two
spends their weekends
cruising garage sales
and they randomly
buy house parts that fit
their fancy at that moment.
Oh, you know, a spiral
staircase would be cool.
How about some Doric columns?
Maybe a fountain with a statue
of Napoleon in the middle?
OK, and they accumulate all
this junk in their backyard.
And then they invite
the in-laws over.
And then pa-in-law says to
son-in-law, why do you have
all this junk in your backyard?
And he says, well, it's
to build our dream house.
And pa-in-law says, I'd like to
see the plans for this house.
>>NOORY: Right.
>>ZUBRIN: And so, they say OK,
well, we'll show you the plans.
So, they call an architect
and they say look,
we want you to design
a house and it has
to include all of these parts.
And so, you get a crazy plan
which is never implemented.
>>NOORY: You have parts
you don't even need, right.
>>ZUBRIN: No.
But well, you do
need in order to show
to pa-in-law as your
excuse of why you made
all these random purchases.
And that's what that plan
that you just saw was.
You have an assortment
of random programs.
You've got the Doric columns.
You got the spiral staircase.
You've got the
statue of Napoleon
in the middle of a fountain.
And there is the
architect who has designed
a house that includes
all those things
and says this is
the dream house.
And the house will never
be built, because it
doesn't fit together, OK.
But that doesn't matter.
Because the whole point
of the design was to get
pa-in-law off your back.
>>NOORY: Interesting take.
Who's going to beat us
to Mars if we don't go?
China?
>>ZUBRIN: Well, I'm hoping
that it will be SpaceX
rather than a foreign entity.
And it's possible.
>>NOORY: That's very possible.
>>ZUBRIN: OK, although I
mean, my vision right now
is that eventually
SpaceX and Blue Origin
and maybe someone
else who comes along
will create enough
of the systems
that we need to go to Mars that
somebody will then sit down
with a president, whoever he
or she may be at that time,
and say look, we have
practically everything we need.
If you commit the
nation to go to Mars,
we could be there by the
end of your second term.
How about it?
OK.
And at that point it's an
easy sell and we do it.
And I think that's what
Musk is looking for too.
He's looking for being paid
to send people to Mars.
>>NOORY: Sure.
>>ZUBRIN: He's investing by
creating the systems to do it
in advance.
But if they don't rise
to that, or I mean,
let's say Musk could fail.
I mean, Musk has got a very
important launch coming up
in March.
He's going to launch the
TESS Space Telescope.
This is the first
time that SpaceX
has been asked to
launch something
that's really important.
>>NOORY: And that
he's got to deliver.
>>ZUBRIN: And the
public is going
to be really unhappy
if that launch fails,
if he loses a space
telescope, OK, boom.
>>NOORY: That took
years to make, right?
>>ZUBRIN: Yes,
absolutely, a decade.
>>NOORY: A decade?
>>ZUBRIN: Yes, between the
design and convincing NASA
to fund it and so forth, yes.
A lot of people have put most of
their careers into this thing.
But it's not just about
them, it's about us.
This is the great planet
finding telescope.
It's going to find planets
orbiting other stars.
I mean, the Kepler Space
Telescope has shown the way,
but this is going to be
thousands of times more
effective than Kepler.
This is a grand telescope
comparable in its value
to Hubble.
And SpaceX is being
asked to launch it.
They're in the big
time with this one.
So, may we have a
drumroll, please.
OK, if they succeed,
they'll be the great heroes.
If they fail, people are going
to want to shut them down.
But there's that,
and then they're
going to be asked
to launch things
more important after that.
And they could fail.
This is a very
high-risk business.
And who knows, if Blue Origin,
when it starts actually
launching rockets
has some failures,
they could be out of
business, although they
have more resiliency because
Bezos has more money.
But you know, if
they fail, then--
>>NOORY: Could be ego.
>>ZUBRIN: Well--
>>NOORY: Between them.
>>ZUBRIN: Well, yeah, but
what I'm saying is well,
first of all, one very positive
result of Musk's activity
has not just been
his own activity,
but the fact that he's
shown us a private space
company that works is possible.
>>NOORY: Very possible.
>>ZUBRIN: And so, we're
going to see more SpaceXs.
Blue Origin, of course,
we've already seen.
But we're going to see
more American SpaceXs.
We're going to see
European SpaceX.
Russian SpaceXs.
We're going to see
Chinese SpaceXs.
>>NOORY: Saudis?
They got the money for it.
>>ZUBRIN: Maybe.
But they don't really have
the technical expertise.
>>NOORY: They could buy it.
>>ZUBRIN: Yeah, but--
>>NOORY: Japan?
>>ZUBRIN: Yes, Japan, certainly.
Japan, India.
I mean, you have to have a
certain scientific outlook
in order to do this.
It's not just money, OK.
Yeah, I mean there's a reason
why this happened first
in America.
There's other countries where
there's big pools of capital
laying around.
But America also
has the know-how.
It's got the creativity.
It's got the ingenuity.
>>NOORY: And the drive.
>>ZUBRIN: And the drive.
Now I've been to Russia
a number of times,
and I happen to know that
there are groups over there
right now who are trying to
pull together a Russian SpaceX.
And there are pools
of capital there owned
by people who have a
passionate interest in space.
The real question though
is what guarantees can they
get from the Putin regime
that if they build a company
it won't just be stolen?
>>NOORY: Right, it could be.
>>ZUBRIN: And it could be.
>>NOORY: He'll nationalize it
>>ZUBRIN: So, in fact,
the kleptocracy in Russia
is actually impairing it
from having its own SpaceX.
And ultimately,
unless they reform,
it will impair their
national defense,
because space is a
very important part
of national defense right now.
So, the Russians,
the Putin regime
is going to be
faced with a choice.
If you want Russia
to remain strong,
you're going to have to
provide some guarantees
for private property
and individual rights.
>>NOORY: For years you have
been a proponent to get to Mars.
You don't give up.
How come?
>>ZUBRIN: No one ever
won by giving up.
>>NOORY: But why do you
want to go to Mars, Robert?
>>ZUBRIN: Why do I want
to see people on Mars?
>>NOORY: Yes.
>>ZUBRIN: Because at one point
in my life, me going to Mars
was a real possibility.
But I don't think that's
realistic at this point.
I'm already 65.
We've wasted too much time.
But if I can have a significant
part in helping make it happen,
that's good enough for me.
Because I think it's
the most important thing
going on in the world right.
>>NOORY: It is exciting.
>>ZUBRIN: OK, I mean
look, think about this.
What happened in 1492?
>>NOORY: Mr. Columbus.
>>ZUBRIN: Right.
That's true.
And any American would say that.
That's the only thing
we remember from 1492.
But other things
happened in 1492
that were the big headliners.
The Borgias took over
the Papacy in 1492.
That was the big coup.
>>NOORY: That was a big story.
>>ZUBRIN: OK, Lorenzo
de Medici died in 1492.
England and France signed
a peace treaty in 1492.
If there had been big
time newspapers and 1492,
those would have
been the big stories,
not this Italian weaver's son
taking three little boats off
into the ocean.
And you know, what's that about?
Who cares?
What's the point?
So, you know, in 1903
the Wright brothers flew
the first airplane?
Who was Secretary of State?
Nobody knows.
>>NOORY: Nobody knows.
>>ZUBRIN: OK, you know.
None of that stuff matters.
So, you only have a
certain time on Earth here.
You want to do
something that matters.
500 years from now I
believe that if we're
successful in turning
humanity into a spacefaring
species, if we do
our job, which is
to have that first
little Plymouth Rock
settlement on Mars, 500
years now not only will there
be new branches of human
civilization on Mars,
but on thousands of planets
orbiting thousands of stars
in this neighborhood
of the galaxy.
And when they look
back on this time, what
are they going to care about?
Will they care about
which gang of murderers
came out on top in Syria?
Will they care about
who was in and who
was out and this and
that the other thing?
And you know, who's going
to remember Rex Tillerson?
I mean, hello.
But what we did to make their
grant civilization possible,
that's what will matter.
>>NOORY: People still
remember Neil Armstrong.
>>ZUBRIN: Yeah, they still
They still remember Columbus.
It's 500 years ago.
>>NOORY: Yeah, exactly.
>>ZUBRIN: And 500
years from now,
we may have gone to the
Moon to beat the Soviet
Union to the Moon.
500 years from now, they'll
remember Neil Armstrong,
but only history buffs will even
know what the Soviet Union was.
>>NOORY: And who will
remember the candidates who
want to go to Mars permanently?
>>REPORTER: Mars One has
just taken another step
to bring mankind where it
has never stepped before.
Meet the Mars 100.
Just 100 candidates now
remain in a competition
for a seat on a one way
trip to the red planet.
>>ZACHARY GALLEGOS:
I want to go to Mars
not just to be a
part of history,
but to inspire people
around the world.
>>REPORTER: Initially,
more than 200,000
applied for the Mars One
astronaut selection program
from all over the world.
About a year ago, that number
narrowed to about 1,000.
That's when we first
met six of them.
>>LEILA ZUCKER: I've
wanted to go into space
since I was three years old.
>>REPORTER: Out of
this group, just two
advanced to the final 100.
Leila Zucker, a married
46-year-old ER doctor
from Washington DC
who is well, excited.
>>LEILA ZUCKER: Spaceship,
spaceship, spaceship!
>>REPORTER: And Daniel Carey,
a 53-year-old data architect
from Virginia, husband
and father of two.
>>DANIEL CAREY: The whole
impact and possibility
becomes a lot more
real and sharp
as the numbers get smaller.
>>NOORY: Are these
people serious?
>>ZUBRIN: Um,
well, I don't think
that Mars One is going to
succeed in sending people
to Mars because they don't
have the financial resources.
>>NOORY: To get them there.
>>ZUBRIN: That's right.
But they did inspire
a lot of people
with the visions of
human settlement of Mars.
And I've met a fair number
of these Mars One final 100.
And a lot of them are
very credible people.
I would say of that
final 100, 20 or 30
would absolutely be qualified
to make the NASA astronaut core.
>>NOORY: You'd feel honored
to send them, wouldn't you.
>>ZUBRIN: That's right.
And we had two of them
actually participate
in the Mars Society's recent
expedition to the Arctic
where we did a simulated
Mars mission up there.
So, no, you know, Mars One
is visionary in the sense
that Bas Lansdorp does not
have the resources to make
it happen.
But I do think that the idea of
a privately funded Mars colony
is possible.
I do think that sending
people to Mars one-way
to create a colony is possible.
Colonization is a one-way trip.
Life's a one way trip.
But I think it
would take someone
with more resources and personal
connections and other things
to make it work.
Just like there
were a lot of people
who wanted to start
their own space launch
company before SpaceX.
>>NOORY: Right, but they
didn't have the resources.
>>ZUBRIN: They didn't
have the resources.
Musk was the first
one who really did.
>>NOORY: Yeah.
>>ZUBRIN: And so, he's
laid out a vision.
He's created a dream,
just like the people
who created the dream of the
private space launch company.
They tried.
They failed.
But ultimately, you know, Elon
Musk saw that and he said,
I could do this.
And did it.
>>NOORY: What do we find
if we go to Mars, Robert?
What do we really find?
Do we see a past civilization?
What do we find?
>>ZUBRIN: Well, we find--
OK, first of all, there's
two different things
that have to do with
Mars and they both bear
on the question of life.
One is life in the past and the
other is life in the future.
OK.
Now, in terms of
life in the past,
OK, Mars was once a
warm and wet planet.
It could have evolved life.
Mars was warm and wet 3
and 1/2 billion years ago
at the same time that
life appeared on Earth.
>>NOORY: That's right.
>>ZUBRIN: OK, now
the question is this.
Did life appear on Mars?
And if so, did it
appear indigenously
and then come to Earth by
natural transfer of material
by meteoric impact?
>>NOORY: A meteor, sure.
>>ZUBRIN: Did it appear
because life from Earth
came and colonized Mars
through the same process?
Did we get two separate origins?
Or were we both colonized
from the outside?
And we can resolve
this by going to Mars.
See, there's a real mystery.
>>NOORY: And they're
all possible.
>>ZUBRIN: Yes,
they're all possible.
And we don't have
any proof right now.
The one thing we do
know is that there's
something very suspicious
about life on Earth,
which is that it appears
virtually as soon as it could.
As soon as the planet
cooled enough to have
liquid water almost
immediately life appears.
>>NOORY: You find that unusual?
>>ZUBRIN: Well,
that is suggesting
that it was kind of
around and waiting
to drop and start as soon
as the place became livable.
>>NOORY: Maybe it was ongoing.
>>ZUBRIN: Well, yeah.
But anyway, but
that is one thing.
Another thing that's
suspicious about life on Earth
is we don't find any
what I call pre-bacteria.
That is, we don't find any
evidence of free living
organisms on Earth
simpler than bacteria.
>>NOORY: Right.
>>ZUBRIN: Now, you
think about this.
I mean, OK, you think
about an iPhone.
An iPhone is a machine.
But there's all sorts of
technologies that proceed it.
There's computers, there's
electricity, there's batteries,
there's glass, there's steel.
There's all these things.
There's a whole technological
history behind the iPhone, OK.
Now, so, we can believe
that the iPhone was invented
by earthlings because they
invented all this stuff that
led up to it.
OK, but what if this was the
prehistoric age and people
had no technologies
beyond stone axes
and all of a sudden somebody
shows up with an iPhone.
OK, you would suspect
that must have then came
from the outside.
>>NOORY: Had to.
>>ZUBRIN: OK, right.
Now, so bacteria may seem
simple compared to big animals
and plants and people.
But they're really
very complicated.
They've got all sorts of
extremely complicated systems
and subsystems.
And they got a whole language
of information technology
in them, DNA, and
RNA and all of this.
OK, it's all there.
There had to have been
a prior evolution.
We find no evidence
of it on Earth.
OK, so, if we go
to Mars and let's
say we find bacteria similar to
Earth bacteria, but also more
primitive organisms.
So we could see the evolutionary
history from chemistry to life,
then we'd say, well
life evolved on Mars
and then it came to the Earth.
If we were to go to Mars and
find a totally different kind
of organism that didn't use
DNA and RNA for information,
then we'd say whoa,
that's a local evolution
different than Earth evolution.
And gee, if it could happen
there, it could happen here.
And I guess maybe
the bacteria just
wiped out their more primitive
ancestors or something, OK.
Because this shows that
life could evolve commonly.
If, on the other hand,
we find only bacteria
of more or less the same
kind that we have here
and no pre-bacteria,
that can indicate
the both Earth and Mars were
seeded from the outside.
>>NOORY: Which is
a dramatic story.
>>ZUBRIN: Right.
>>NOORY: Panspermia?
>>ZUBRIN: And if
Earth-- yes, panspermia.
And if Earth and Mars were
seeded from the outside,
that means all solar systems are
being seeded from the outside.
It means the universe
is filled with life.
>>NOORY: Do you think Mars
might have had intelligent life?
>>ZUBRIN: No, I actually
don't think that.
I mean, I could be
wrong about that.
But the kind of Mars
that we see today
would not support an
abundant biosphere,
let alone an intelligent
civilization.
Now, I do believe that Mars
will host intelligent life.
I believe when people
go to Mars we're
going to make Mars
much more habitable.
>>NOORY: Sure.
Well, you have a
plan to terraform it.
>>ZUBRIN: Yes.
And I think we
will terraform it.
Because we're a life, and
it's the nature of life
to take barren environments
and transform them into places
that are friendly for
the development of life.
Life has radically
terraformed the Earth.
The early Earth
resembled the early Mars
with the CO2 atmosphere
and so forth and no soil.
It's life that has put
oxygen in our atmosphere.
It's life that put
soil on the continents.
It's life, clearly,
that made Earth green.
And no sooner does any
barren place appear on Earth,
like Hawaii coming out
of the Pacific Ocean,
this huge piece of
bare, sterile basalt--
>>NOORY: And lifting it's way.
>>ZUBRIN: --then birds
fly over, and they
drop seeds and the
place becomes lush.
And then Polynesians show
up and let loose pigs
so there's something
good to eat.
And then Europeans show
up and build hotels
so there's a nice
place to check in.
This is what we do.
And it would be unnatural
if human beings was
the kind of bird, as it were,
that the biosphere has evolved
to take the seeds of
life and transport them
to currently barren
islands across space
did not do exactly that.
So we're going to do it.
We're going to do it.
We're going to make--
we're not just going
to bring life to Mars,
we're going to
bring Mars to life.
>>NOORY: Will it be government
or these private sector
companies?
>>ZUBRIN: Well, I
think initially it's
going to be a
combination of both.
OK, I mean look,
look, frankly, SpaceX
is a combination of both.
It was started by Musk
with his own money.
But at this point, I
think about half the money
coming into SpaceX is
from the government.
I think the first
human missions to Mars
will be done with a significant
role by SpaceX hardware.
SpaceX is going to make
the mission a lot cheaper
for the American people to do.
But the government
is still going
to have to foot
part of the bill.
But it's like Lewis and Clark.
You know, they were funded
by the US government.
But once they did it,
they went across America
and they found how you
could cross America.
>>NOORY: They were on their own.
>>ZUBRIN: And that there
were resources out there
on the Pacific coast.
Then the wagon trains
started rolling.
>>NOORY: Absolutely.
>>ZUBRIN: So, the
government had a role
in the settling of the West.
They helped opened it up.
They established
the cavalry forts.
They gave land grants for
the railroads and so forth.
But ultimately, then
they made it possible
and then private
individuals did it.
>>NOORY: Some scientists
think that there
could have been a nuclear
holocaust, a war on Mars.
What do you think?
>>ZUBRIN: I don't think there
was a nuclear war on Mars,
because I don't think there was
a technological civilization
on Mars.
And I don't think
there's ever going
to be a nuclear
war on Mars, even
though I think there will be
a technological civilization
on Mars.
Because I think--
>>NOORY: It will be us.
>>ZUBRIN: Well, I think
as humanity matures,
we go out to space,
what we're going
to do by going out into
space is prove that there are
infinite number of
resources, that there
is no need to have wars.
Because it is people
that are resourceful.
And if we can turn Mars
into a living world
we can turn innumerable
worlds into living worlds.
>>NOORY: If we go to Mars
for any length of time,
what will we do there?
What will we build?
>>ZUBRIN: Well, if we
go to Mars to settle,
the first thing we
need to do is learn
how to take Martian
materials and turn them
into resources, OK.
>>NOORY: Including the
water that's there.
>>ZUBRIN: Yes.
See look, there really
is no such thing
as a natural resource.
There's only natural
raw materials.
Land was not a resource until
people learned how to farm.
It is farming that turns
to land from simply space
that you have to travel over
into a resource in itself.
>>NOORY: Right.
>>ZUBRIN: OK, petroleum
was underground,
but it wasn't a resource until
we learned how to drill for it
and refine it and make machines
that could use the product.
Uranium was not a
resource until we learned
how to do nuclear energy.
There's all sorts
of stuff on Mars.
But it won't be resources
until people go there,
because it is people
who are resourceful.
And now we go there, we'll
learn how to extract water
from the Martian surface.
We'll learn how to
extract geothermal energy
from the Martian subsurface.
We'll learn how to
grow crops on Mars.
We'll learn how to make not
only fuel and oxygen, which
is part of my own
Mars Direct plan,
but plastics, growing
food, of course,
fabrics, metals,
plastics, wires--
>>NOORY: It will be
a mini planet Earth.
>>ZUBRIN: --tubes,
habitation structures.
>>NOORY: Just like Earth.
>>ZUBRIN: Well, it'll
be different from Earth,
but it will be like
Earth in the place
that it will be
full of resources
that we have created by
inventing the technology
to bring them into being.
>>NOORY: Robert, there's been
talk that by going to Mars
there's a problem
with radiation.
At a Ted convention, Jeffrey
Rusick presented that problem.
JEFFREY RUSICK: So, one of the
biggest problems we have is
what's the effect on us
as we travel to deep space
and how do we protect ourselves?
So, I wanted to put this in.
When the Mars Science Laboratory
traveled to Mars last year
and landed last year, the last
couple of bars on this chart
are radiation dose, OK.
They measured radiation
dose on the way to Mars,
and it took them
about six months.
And then there's another,
the red bar on there
is the 500 days on Mars.
So, if you take the bars
that show if it takes you
six months to get to Mars and
you spend 500 days on Mars
and then you spend 180 more
days coming back, if you add up
just those last two bars
in that curve there,
you end up with a dose
that is deadly to you know,
that's not healthy for humans.
I wouldn't say deadly,
bad not good news.
Because you can see
the comparisons here
for the other things, so
the Space Station and things
like that.
So, we need to
solve that problem.
We need to solve how
we protect ourselves
if we're going to do
these missions to Mars
and other places in deep space.
And we do not have the
answer for this yet.
This is one of
the things we just
don't have the answer for yet.
>>NOORY: Is that a real problem?
>>ZUBRIN: No.
This is just another
example of somebody
saying you can't do your
program until you do my program.
The fact of the matter is this.
And I have a doctorate
in nuclear engineering,
so I know a lot
about this subject.
First of all, the radiation
dose rate on the way to Mars
is a factor of two
larger than what
it is on the Space Station.
So, Peggy Whitson just spent
a year on the Space Station.
She got the same radiation
dose as she would have gotten--
>>NOORY: Going to Mars.
>>ZUBRIN: --on a six
month voyage to Mars.
>>NOORY: And there's
nothing wrong with her.
>>ZUBRIN: There's
And in fact, there's a number of
other astronauts and cosmonauts
who've done multiple long
missions on the Space
Station or the Soviet previous
Space Station, the Mir,
in which they've gotten doses
fully comparable to what
they would have gotten
going to Mars and back.
And we see no radiological
casualties among this group.
And now that's not
to say there isn't
any increase in cancer risk.
There is.
The total cancer risk
you get by going to Mars
and back would raise your
risk of dying of cancer,
assuming there's no advance in
medical technique, by about 1%.
That is the average American.
>>NOORY: 1%.
>>ZUBRIN: That is, yes.
If you're an average
American and you don't smoke,
you've got a 20% chance
you're going to die of cancer.
This would make it 21.
If you're an average
American smoker, it's 40.
So, if in fact, we
sent a crew to Mars
and we recruited
them from smokers
and we sent them to Mars
without their tobacco,
we would be reducing their
chance of getting cancer.
>>NOORY: Interesting stats.
>>ZUBRIN: Yeah.
So, one reason to send people to
Mars would be for their health.
Now, the main health effect that
we've actually seen in space
has not been from
radiation, it's
been from zero gravity effects.
And NASA has studiously resisted
implementing the solution
to zero gravity, which is
to rotate the spacecraft.
Because the NASA
space medicine program
is controlled by zero gravity
health effects researchers.
So, these people are not
interested in protecting
the health of astronauts.
They're interested in getting
research dollars to fill
their own bowls of rice.
This is absolute nonsense.
And these people
who say they want
to put a space station in lunar
orbit, OK, and put astronauts
in that so that they
can test the astronauts
under larger radiation fields.
OK, this is crazy.
This is like testing treatments
for wounds by taking soldiers
and shooting them and then see
how well you can patch them up.
This is crazy.
So, once again,
astronauts need to be
explorers not guinea pigs.
They're getting on the Space
Station comparable radiation
doses as they would
get going to Mars
and back, except they're
not actually going to Mars
and back.
I mean, imagine-- you know,
it's one thing to send out
pilots in bombers
to do an air raid
and have them risk
the enemy flak.
It's another thing to have
them in training mission
flying above your
own city and shooting
at them with anti-aircraft
guns and take the same risk
without actually
doing the mission.
One is ethical,
the other is not.
>>NOORY: If you could
convince people and entice
them to do a Mars program,
how would you do it?
>>ZUBRIN: I've been trying
to convince the government
to do it by pointing out the
scientific gains, the gains
to education by
challenging American youth,
learn your science, you could
be a pioneer of new worlds.
We'd get millions of young
scientists from that.
And by what it means
in terms of America
putting our stamp on the future
by having a major influence
in establishing the first new
branch of human civilization.
If I was to try to convince
private enterprise to do it,
I've been thinking about that.
I think what you'd have
to do is the following.
First of all, we'd have to
have the cost brought down
substantially by people
like Musk and Bezos,
which they are in
the process of doing.
And when the costs are
brought down enough,
go to Silicon Valley.
And I say listen guys,
this is what I want to do.
I want to establish an
inventors colony on Mars.
You guys invest.
We will recruit 1,000 of the
most technically accomplished
people who are totally committed
to the idea of expanding
humanity to another world.
And we will send them there.
And on Mars, they'll have to
invent all kinds of things.
They'll have to invent
super productive crops
because their agriculture will
be limited to greenhouses.
They'll invent
robotic technology
because there will be a
labor shortage and a need
for division of labor.
They'll invent
advanced 3-D printing.
They'll invent all
kinds of stuff.
You'll get the patents.
OK, you know, in other words,
at the frontier where you have--
>>NOORY: They get the money.
>>ZUBRIN: Yes, and
they'll get the money.
But the frontier is where
people are free to invent
and forced to invent.
And we'll send the
best people to do it.
You know, the American
frontier, 19th century America
was a massive engine for
technological progress.
Yankee ingenuity, we
became famous for it, OK.
Because we were freed of
all sorts of restrictions
of the old world and we were
in a new and challenging
environment.
We were forced to invent.
Mars will be that
100 times over.
>>NOORY: Robert, thanks
for being on the program.
>>ZUBRIN: It's my pleasure.
>>NOORY: It's exciting.
>>ZUBRIN: OK.
>>NOORY: Let's go.
>>ZUBRIN: Let's go on to Mars.
>>NOORY: Would you go?
>>ZUBRIN: In a heartbeat.
>>NOORY: Would you come back?
>>ZUBRIN: You know, the
Marquis de Lafayette
came to help out in the
American Revolution.
And he did go back to France.
But when he went back, he
brought back enough American
soil to be buried in.
And actually, he lived
a long time after that.
He was still alive
50 years later.
If we were going
to Mars to stay,
if we were going to Mars
to establish a colony,
I would go to stay.
But if we are going to Mars
as part of an expedition
and we were coming back, I'd
bring back enough Martian soil
to be buried in.
>>NOORY: You would?
>>ZUBRIN: Yes.
>>NOORY: All right.
How about that.
Would you go to Mars?
And would you stay?
I'm not sure I would give
up all the wonderful things
on planet Earth.
But it sure is intriguing.
I'm George Noory.
And thanks for watching
"Beyond Belief."
[THEME MUSIC]